Added Portal Run ID documentation (#669)
umccr/data-portal-apis: docs/pipeline/portal_run_id.md

# Portal Run ID

> You may come across people mentioning this term. The following document and explain about its attributes, property, constraint rule and use cases that intend to solve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may come across people mentioning this term. The following document explains its attributes, property, constraint rule and use cases that it intends to solve.
```

## Curation

### Where would you encounter?

> Often written as `portal_run_id` in Portal UI, [API endpoints](../ENDPOINTS.md) or data export from Portal database through [Portal Athena](../athena) or via meeting/Slack/Trello communication. This ID keeps track of every BioInformatics analysis run; also known as a "workflow run" for short. You may encounter this ID scheme when someone referring to analysis output for traceability with Portal ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often written as `portal_run_id` in Portal UI, [API endpoints](../ENDPOINTS.md) or data export from Portal database through [Portal Athena](../athena) or via meeting/Slack/Trello communication. This ID keeps track of every Bioinformatics analysis run; also known as a "workflow run" for short. You may encounter this ID scheme when someone is referring to analysis output for traceability with the Portal ecosystem.
```

# Portal Run ID

You may come across people mentioning this term. The following document and explain about its attributes, property, constraint rule and use cases that intend to solve.

> In summary, the `portal_run_id` is formula-based and, systematic scheme for herding the analysis run records into Portal Pipeline database; either with data "late binding" process or automated tracking process; so that one person (or a system event) would start the analysis without the wait and, still be consistent by following standard operation procedure (SOP) and best practises.

![portal_run_id.png](../model/portal_run_id.png)

> link: `docs/model/portal_run_id.png`

Reviewer 2: Sweet! 
That image explains it well, but perhaps move it under the Construct section?

Author: Ok, will do.

Author: Yup. Let us this be for Portal generation of id scheme. 

For orcabus and uuid7, we shall discuss and study; pros/cons to see whether we can adopt to (need to) the new scheme, etc.

### Unit of work

It is designed in mind such that
- Every BioInformatics analysis run is immutable and single unit of work transaction
- Every BioInformatics analysis run get assigned one unique `portal_run_id`
  - This includes re-running the analysis for the same Sample other everytime
- Each analysis run must meet their terminal state such as `Failed`, `Aborted`, `Succeeded`, `Deleted`

A typical BioInformatics workflow (languages like [CWL](https://www.commonwl.org), [WDL](https://openwdl.org), [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io), [Snakemake](https://github.com/snakemake/snakemake)) consist of multiple steps or tasks. A Portal orchestration views one analysis workflow run as single unit of work transaction and, this workflow must either be completed successfully or, failed otherwise.

The complexity of a workflow contains many steps or, small steps within it; is upto the author of BioInformatics workflow expert concern. i.e. A workflow being too big or small. Regardless, Portal orchestration engine takes single workflow run as one unit of work item that must meet terminal condition without tampering the workflow execution run, _in-flight_.

> ### History

Reviewer 2: Minor comment: 
Move/mention the "states" here as they form the history. Make a separate point/emphasis on deletion, it's part of the history, but a common/important use case that's usually user driven (as opposed to automation).

Author: Eh. Perhaps we do this editorial together.

Author: Sorry Flo. Time is not on our side. Since it is minor edit need, I will go ahead and merge it as-is for now. We can come back to this editorial down track.

Deletion marker happens on the `portal_run_id` database record when the analysis run outcome found to be unfit for scientific curation by post BioInformatics analysis quality control process. When deletion request happens, the following Portal SOP will be carried out: 
- Update the corresponding `portal_run_id` status in Portal database to `Deleted`
- Delete the associated BioInformatics analysis results (artifacts such as html, pdf reports, csv/tsv, vcf, bam, etc) from the data storage (Cloud Object Store such as AWS S3)

Since Portal never delete "the contextual fact" about BioInformatics analysis run has been performed; by knowing `portal_run_id` (even it has deletion marker or soft-deletion marker), Portal can answer the input and, output of the analysis run at all time. This gives analysis run history by design for audit trail.

## BioInformatics

### Construct

The `portal_run_id` consists of two parts: **time component** and **random component**. It has total length of fixed size `16` characters. The ID construct algorithm as follows.

Step 1: Generate datestamp in `YYYYMMDD` format
```bash

> $ date +"%Y%m%d"

Author: Good point, `-u` flag work for UTC. I will update it.

```
date -u +"%Y%m%d"
20240522
```

> $ date +"%Y%m%d"

Author: Updated (this and all down under) with https://github.com/umccr/data-portal-apis/commit/b651620a7b94cd4df373b599f55fa363e2a91233

Pls have a look when you are able, pls. Tq.

> $ date +"%Y%m%d"

Author: I will close this PR sometime today. If no more comment, assume all good.

20240512
```

Step 2: Generate UUID and get the first 8 characters block
```bash
uuidgen | cut -c 1-8

> 9e44e5e0

Reviewer 3: Ah nice, I was emulating with $(xxd -l 4 -c 4 -p < /dev/random) which was a little gross

- If it is run on HPC systems (such Gadi, Spartan), you get `portal_run_id` and your Job ID (PBS, or queuing scheduler system).

So on so forth. 

Every execution of a workflow; you must generate a unique `portal_run_id` and, keep the record of corresponding execution ID from the underlay compute system. _This can even be on your local computer execution!_ (explain next)

### Output Path

As for Bioinformatician (as well as) anyone who perform the informatics analysis run; one should use this `portal_run_id` in the workflow result output path. Example such as:

```bash
/scratch/runs/wgs_tumor_normal/202405129e44e5e0/
file://scratch/runs/wgs_tumor_normal/202405129e44e5e0/
s3://scratch-bucket/runs/wgs_tumor_normal/202405129e44e5e0/
gds://scratch-volume/runs/wgs_tumor_normal/202405129e44e5e0/
icav2://scratch-project/runs/wgs_tumor_normal/202405129e44e5e0/
```

Once the analysis run has been concluded, we can drive the results back; enter into the Portal Pipeline database for traceability and/or further data warehousing purpose. Often, this process need to comply with Portal [Metadata](metadata.md).

> In summary, the `portal_run_id` is formula-based and, systematic scheme for herding the analysis run records into Portal Pipeline database; either with data "late binding" process or automated tracking process; so that one person (or a system event) would start the analysis without the wait and, still be consistent by following standard operation procedure (SOP) and best practises.

Author: Sort of, yes. Perhaps, we should just use "out-of-band", better?

> In summary, the `portal_run_id` is formula-based and, systematic scheme for herding the analysis run records into Portal Pipeline database; either with data "late binding" process or automated tracking process; so that one person (or a system event) would start the analysis without the wait and, still be consistent by following standard operation procedure (SOP) and best practises.

Author: I will replace it.
